[Music]
on tonight's panel Grant Shapps the
government's transport secretary former
minister and chairman of the
Conservative Party under David Cameron a
Labour MP nearly 10 years former shadow
secretary for energy and climate change
listen Andy Rupert Reid professor of
philosophy at East Anglia University
former Green Party candidate and now
spokesperson for climate change
campaigners extinction rebellion
journalist and breakfast host on talk
radio Julia Hartley Brewer and
businessman and guest dragon on the
BBC's Dragons Den Fiona fetus
[Music]
[Applause]
welcome very much to our panel to our
audience here and of course to you at
home
joining the conversation you can argue
along in the usual way hashtag leave zqt
on facebook on instagram and on twitter
we'd like to hear what you've got to say
so let's hear our first question tonight
which is from sally knight should
climate change activists be applauded or
arrested Lisa and well I really support
what's happened in the last few weeks
and I don't say that lightly but the
reason I say it is because I've been a
member of parliament now for nearly 10
years
and over that time I've seen how this is
an issue the most important issue of our
time that is always kicked into the long
grass because there's always something
that is supposedly more important always
something that is supposedly more
pressing and I think without those young
people going out and climate strike
without the protests that we've seen in
the streets this issue just quite simply
would not be on the agenda but what
really matters now is what happens next
because there's a chance now to build a
really broad coalition that will keep
that pressure up why do we need to keep
the pressure up because we're not even
on track to meet our Net Zero target by
2050 the reason for that is actually
grants Department Transport where we're
actually going backwards in terms of
emissions not forwards and I suppose the
only thing I would say to to the
protesters many of whom are really
admirer so far is that you've got to
take people with you on this journey
there is no point in telling people in
towns like Wigan to get out of their
cars when our trains and our buses have
been brought to a standstill for the
last two years this has got to be a
positive agenda about creating the clean
energy jobs in towns like mine jobs that
were lost when the mines closed many
years ago about warmer homes about
better futures for our young people and
about a better environment and if we
make common cause with people who are
trying to improve the daily lives of
ordinary people in this country I think
this is a battle that will win will
start to take action and will build a
better Britain in the process
well I think the argument is undeniable
although I think there's a blow across
the pond there is denying its ever
happening but we'll put him to one side
for the moment because it's not very
important here tonight but the reality
is the argument is undeniable the method
is ridiculous because I've just come
back from my company conference two days
out 500 colleagues there and I've got to
tell you
climate change was the number one
question we had for discussion at that
conference we got so many things for our
business
everybody's tuned in on the environment
sustainability climate change on what
our business is doing and in fact they
even voted that now which you plan every
this year a tree for every colleague we
hire and we already have us over 4,000
trees for this year and they're saying
they'd rather have that spend out of our
bonus pot that's how important it is so
we don't need people to get super glue
stick it on somebody else's buck and
hang around there for two days
stopping them going to work stopping him
going to the hospital
stopping them going through their normal
everyday lives where they work to put
food on the table for their children a
roof over their head and to lead a
normal life that just is not acceptable
you are sequestered I think it's really
interesting Lisa that you use the word
protestor because I deliberately worded
the question activist which is
suggesting that I support absolutely
support the cause and it's absolutely
right that this is highlighted and the
government's worldwide take notice but I
agree with Theo that the methods I
really don't applaud at all and and I
think for normal people just trying to
get to work do the right thing
it really is deplorable and and I just
think there are better ways to grab
headlines so what do you think when you
hear that because you take people with
you well I think the first thing to say
is if there are better methods honestly
I'm all ears
because I've been in this game for a
long time I've been working in
non-governmental organizations in the
Green Party for many years knocking on
doors etc and you know what none of it
worked right earlier on this year we're
still on the same trajectory to disaster
as we have been for the past 20 years
but then what happens in April we had
extinction rebellion and the first
glimmer of starting to change we managed
to push the issue up the agenda when a
thousand of us brave souls and it's
because of them you know it's because of
those 2,000 people now of hours gives me
let me just finish this point ski it's
because of those 2,000 people that have
been arrested yeah that I have the
privilege of being here on this panel
this evening at all right otherwise I
wouldn't be here yeah but look what I do
want to acknowledge is this there's a
reason why the story hasn't worked until
recently and the reason is that the
problem feels too remote so yeah after
April a lot more people said we agree
climate change is an emergency but it
still feels too remote people doesn't
feel like an emergency so you know those
of you who are there thinking well is it
really quite as bad as they're saying I
get where you're coming from I
understand that I tried for 20 years in
the old methods and the old story and it
doesn't work so here's my message this
evening we're changing up we're changing
up in terms of our methods nonviolent
civil disobedience the same thing that
for the suffragettes for Martin Luther
King the Gandhi and many others besides
and we're changing up with the message
so on my message to you tonight is
forget about 2050
forget about rising sea levels forget
about polar bears and penguins precious
and beautiful though they are this is
about us now this is about the fact that
last summer the crops in this country
were failing as they were baked in the
fields this is about the vulnerability
of our food supply this is not even
about our children or our grandchildren
anymore this is about the intense
vulnerability of our whole society to
this catastrophe that is already
descending on us that's why we're at
London City Airport today showing some
of that vulnerability that's why we need
to be out there until that message gets
through and starts to really really
change okay little bit obviously we all
know that the environment is a huge
issue
I myself follow a plant-based diet
because of it but it's interesting that
you talk about the methods for me a load
of people dancing industry probably you
know off their head and you know no
bread you may be maligning a whole group
of people though I think it's the wrong
type of people who are putting out this
message there is a real you know
argument for the environment and it's
completely painting the wrong picture
and as Theo said it's stopping people
going to work it's causing normal people
problems and it shouldn't be it should
be a problem that we all adopt and we
all change or regular lifestyles for and
I think you know when you see these
people dancing in the street it's not a
protest it's just a field day and I
think it's really important that we make
this a proper issue and not make it look
stupid in the front you want to say
something I do worry about some of the
younger people who's seeing this and
thinking it's an appropriate thing for
them to do potentially and get in
criminal records and then potentially
harming their future employment
prospects by having a criminal record
which then means certain job
opportunities aren't available to them
men in the glasses one individual called
Greta thumb burg we know we'd understand
this she's actually gone with a lot of
support and in
around the world and and whether you
like her attitude or not she's actually
done that whereas what we have now is
our activists in London were actually
alienating people against them I think
starting to destroy the argument they
need to be very careful the woman in the
yellow sweater here I was going to
reference a George man Bo article in a
few days ago where you spoke about the
need to perhaps refer to this as an
extermination event rather than an
extinction event because that's too
passive and I wondered what the panel
thought of that indeed and do you
support the the action that's being
taken away it seems for a minute oh I do
I do
yes with a big I think it's sad that
they're being arrested rather than
applauded I think that's a waste of
police time I look absolutely I think we
should be tackling environmental issues
moving towards be renewable fuels
cleaning up our waste in our oceans and
looking after our planet but there is
nothing in any of the science nothing in
any of the IPCC reports easy reports
that suggest we are heading towards a
catastrophe a crisis mass extermination
or anything of the thought this is scare
mongering of the worst kind well the UN
says we have 12 years to limit global
temperatures to 1.5 degrees an urgent
and unprecedented changes are needed
well know what it says is if if we do
actually want to try and prevent 1.5
degrees we have at it but there's a
two-thirds chance that we can do that if
we do address those issues but there's
no necessarily a catastrophe that
results if we don't do that then what
the earth has been warmer than that but
the key thing is what we have to do in
order to achieve that what extinction
rebellion are doing and what they want
which is very very different from what
has been discussed by other climate
activist over the years is the net zero
global carbon emissions by 2025 is
achievable not by getting rid of diesel
cars or or perhaps people having a bit
of an extra tax on their flights to New
York on holiday we are talking about
getting rid of all cars all buses all
trains all central heating all flights
having a state rationing of meat this is
what it will actually involve it's
impossible to achieve that target
otherwise this is about taking us back
to
pre-industrial age now we're told
constantly this is the terrible thing
industrialization has been a terrible
thing industrialization Industrial
Revolution is the greatest thing that's
ever happened to mankind it is delivered
longer healthier happier more fulfilling
lives for billions more people than
anything else that has ever been
achieved by our planet the best time to
be alive is right now apart from
tomorrow whatever the issues are
regarding climate change they will be
solved by technological innovation by
the markets by governments yes getting
together and by a sensible debate based
on the facts what we've got with
extinction rebellion I'm afraid is not a
sensible debate based on science or the
facts it is to all intents and purposes
a sort of a squeeze I religious death
cult and I for one think it's absolute
insane but people are listening but
their demands well look I apologize to
the young man for not having a nose ring
and I apologize for not being part of
any cult I'm in fact I take a lot of my
prompting from the United Nations from
the IPCC who repeatedly say in their
most recent report to limit global
overheat to 1.5 degrees which is
considered the threshold for danger we
need rapid far-reaching and
unprecedented changes in all aspects of
society and why we're back is this late
where's the action where's the action
towards that goal today those those
famous eco extremists the International
Monetary Fund's said this the risk of
catastrophic and irreversible disaster
is rising implying potentially infinite
costs of unmitigated climate change
including human extinction now if that's
not a license for the kind of thing that
we're saying and doing I'm not sure what
is chambered was mentioned I have the
privilege of non grata to Berg and I
asked her in public when she was here in
April to support our first rebellion
what's your view of Greta what's your
view of extinction rebellion Greta and
her reply was very simple she said I
support it wholeheartedly and you know
what at the end of the day this isn't
about whether or not you feel sort of
warm towards extinction rebellion we we
don't really matter all right what
matters is if we succeed
drawing attention to the issue and if we
succeed in managing to start to get at
last the action we need to stop
ourselves driving ourselves over a cliff
that's what it's about but Rupert don't
you understand you're acting like Nantes
you're turning people away from the
great cause that we all believe in we're
talking about it now I've just explained
the cause and actually I'm getting a
decent amount of applause here so I kind
of think done all right
[Applause]
as Lisa rightly pointed out when she was
asked the question at first my
department the the Transport Department
actually is responsible for a lot of the
co2 here's the thing that's not in doubt
we have to get a grip of this I have no
doubt about it at all 27% of the co2
comes from Transport and 90% of that is
from vehicles and there's some really
easy things that we can do which is
moved for example towards electric cars
electrification of the roads and that
would be a very big first move i've got
electric car it's fantastic these are
these are practical steps we can take
but here's the thing I don't understand
rooted we are living in the country the
industrialized nation that's done more
to move further and faster to
decarbonize than any other country in
the world that's legislated to get to
Net Zero so rather than stopping people
from getting to work and stopping people
from eating their hospital appointments
go to a country which isn't doing any of
these things and protest there
uh I just totally agree what you just
said they're absolutely spot-on and
instead of making it difficult for other
people
why don't you protest like peacefully
and protest outside the investor ease
where they're not doing anything at all
the woman in the red sweater hit I was
in London today and at Charing Cross and
there was a whole line of people with
like led type makeup and wearing green
and red walking silently through the
station and I made the presumption they
were extinction rebellion because they
were all in the the Chagas quit work
yeah I do applaud the sentiment behind
it however it is alienating a lot of
people and for me personally I do think
that there is a climate problem I do
think we all need to do something
however it took for me the person that's
made the most impact on me is Sir David
Attenborough in the blue planet when he
said quite majestically respectfully the
amount of plastic that's in the ocean
and and that the the whales and the
other creatures are swallowing and for
me that made a huge impact and it made
me think we all need to get together all
of us to do something small did it let
you change your behavior yes it did it
made me take things seriously because
for him to go on record to say that and
away he goes about saying it it made me
pay attention and my nephew is six and
he watches the blue planet I don't know
that it'll make an impact on him and he
is the future for us
I find it really incredible that you can
sit there and say let's look up the
countries let's take some accountability
here in the UK least I think what you
said about public transport in northern
areas is so true and what I'd like to
see is some accountability from the
government around private car ownership
and taxing something that we know is
incredibly dangerous and investing that
money into public transport specifically
in northern regions where you know
systematically London's overfunded and
then northern regions are left with
private car ownership is a necessity I
was held up by the extension rebellion
protesters earlier today and I was late
picking my son up from school as a
result and he was in floods of tears
desperately upset because I wasn't there
when he expected me to be but in 20
years time he's not going to remember
that what he will remember is if we fail
to act now on this emergency we can cope
with a bit of disruption now if it has
the effect of actually taking action a
bit of disruption is nothing to do you
anticipate it lasting the full fortnight
and then and then what happens after
that well whether it lasts a full
fortnight that depends on how many of
the audience come and join me after
tonight and and take the particular
barricades look the in terms of the
things that have just been said a couple
of key points to respond to the NetZero
target the government has legislated for
great that wouldn't have happened
without us that was outside of the
window of political possibility before
the April rebellion came along and our
rebellion changed the figures changed
the figures completely in terms of how
important people thought the issues what
if this is fact this is just straight
folk look at the polls before and after
the rebellion after the rebellion people
suddenly start saying the environment is
a more important issue than the
immigration more important in the
economy the first thing that's ever
happened in this country that's down to
us now in terms of the figures you gave
this grants about how well this country
is doing you know the first demand of
extinction rebellion is tell the truth
and I just so wish that you would start
telling which figure which is where you
claim that we're doing better than all
the other countries
right yeah the carbonize faster than any
other those figures a gas emissions and
greenhouse gases are comfort damn fast
exclude those figures all the figures
for air travel and sea travel and for
all the pile excuse me it does change it
because actually we fly a lot more in
this country than people do in other
countries States no not in the States
even in Europe so when you get the
figures right when you tell the truth
we're not doing well at all
our carbon emissions have barely come
down since 1990 those are the facts and
I just so wish it is true that is the
truth I'm eatin on this I so wish you
would look into it and I see where she
would start telling the choppers here
now in terms of the thing about other
countries and saying oh why don't you go
and protest in China whatever our
rebellion is what is worldwide right
what we started here is being exported
all over the world a great British
export it's completely peaceful
completely non-violence and as a lady so
rightly said it's disruptive but you
want to see real disruption crop
failures right children not knowing
whether they're going to have a future
at all this is absolute nonsense this is
Malthus on crack cocaine this is the
stuff that's been predicted this this
sort of nihilistic the world is going to
end on the IPCC is not predicting any of
that there is nothing in the science
nothing in the documents nothing in any
of the IPCC reports that is predicting
any of that what this is the way their
tactics you're using and again you don't
have a me extinction rebellion you have
what you call demands and those demands
you're trying to push through by
bullying you've got the option to stand
at the ballot box you have to cheat talk
about the suffragettes and the civil
rights movement to the United States
women didn't have the vote and neither
did black people in America that's why
they had to resort to that sort of
action you have the ballot box last time
around what the European elections are
under PR where Green Party isn't isn't
actually affected by the
first-past-the-post system got eleven
point eight percent of the vote that's a
massive increase in the last general
election at one point six percent so it
just showed you can persuade but you
want to persuade people at the ballot
box you want to have your Julia then hi
Jeff I do
a new standard the ballot box that saves
you I finish time - you only bully
people through our option it's just
that's what is it it's just no I'm sorry
it's not it's not bullying to point out
to people that this actually is a an
international crisis that has to be
taken much more seriously it's no good
for grant to sit here and say look look
at all the brilliant things that we're
doing when his government is the one
that slashed investment in solar that
effectively banned new wind farms that
subsidized diesel which is the dirties
feel of all and your party which is one
of the tracking would bring down our
time in favor of giving people a right
to decide which strikes pays to fracking
it's frankly democratic if you're going
to have fracking imposed on your area
but look let me say this you as well
this isn't just about the environment as
absolutely critical as that is this is
about Mark Carney the governor of the
Bank of England saying very very clearly
that climate change and our failure to
tackle it is the biggest threat to the
global financial system this is people's
pensions this is people's life savings
this is people's livelihood the quiet if
you don't care about the future I do
remember this but this is it when it is
what's the evidence about that at least
I found that there are people in this
room and people listening at home who
started or even an awful lot if you
carry on pretending so this area
[Applause]
and what the economic and political
costs are of different various different
forms of action to tackle the issue we
just sort of shout well you just don't
care about the children if you don't
agree with me final word okay gentlemen
over here said we should move faster on
cars which by the way we had already
said we'd end the sale of petrol diesel
cars by 2040 before any of the
extinction rebellion action last week I
talked about investigating bring out
forward to 2035 gentlemen over here
talks about northern rail and we're
putting a huge multi-billion package
into building a lot more I don't think
this should be I don't think this should
be a political issue in as much as
across Parliament we've agreed to vote
for this but Lisa I have to pick you up
on your solar claim because 99 percent
of all the solar capacity in this
country has been built since this
government was in power so your fact is
simply wrong and Rupert sorry just
finish off you want us to be fact-based
we are following the facts of the
Committee on climate change
so the Committee on climate change are
now the ones who are on committee on
climate change are telling you you'll be
actually way way off the pace and let
your efforts on adaptation look like
your dad's army in other words so when
we have a country very so when we have a
country that for example last year and
you won't let these facts out for some
reason
last year low carbon production of
energy made up over 53% of our entire
production as a nation if I listen to
you I believe we were getting nowhere
whereas in fact this economy is
decarbonizing as I said before rather
than disrupting people's lives here go
and protests in the countries where the
carbon actually needs to be cut at a
much faster rate take where they don't
have any plan in place
you
[Music]